# The Eight Inseparable Rūpas

Rūpas always arise in groups, and the four Great Elements of solidity,
cohesion, temperature and motion are always present wherever there is
materiality. Apart from these four elements there are other rūpas,
namely twentyfour “derived rū pas” (in Pāli: upādā rūpas). The derived
rūpas cannot arise without the four Great Elements, they are dependent
on them. Four among the derived rūpas always arise together with the
four Great Elements in every group of rūpas and are thus present
wherever materiality occurs, no matter whether rūpas of the body or
materiality outside the body. These four rūpas are the following:

-   visible object (or colour
-   odour
-   flavour
-   nutrition

The four Great elements and these four derived rūpas, which always arise
together, are called the “inseparable rūpas” (in Pāli: avinibbhoga
rūpas). Wherever solidity arises, there also have to be cohesion,
temperature, motion, colour, odour, flavour and nutritive essence.
Visible object has as its proximate cause the four Great Elements
because it cannot arise without them. However, when a characteristic of
one of these four Great Elements, such as hardness or heat, is
experienced, the accompanying visible object cannot be experienced at
the same time. Only one rūpa at a time can be experienced by citta. When
there are conditions for seeing, visible object is experienced. When we
close our eyes, there may be remembrance of the shape and form of a
thing, but that is not the experience of visible object. The thinking of
a “thing”, no matter whether our eyes are closed or open, is different
from the actual experience of what is visible. Odour cannot arise alone,
it needs the four Great Elements which arise together with it and it is
also accompanied by the other rū pas included in the eight inseparable
rū pas. When odour appears we tend to be carried away by like or
dislike. We are attached to fragrant odours and we loathe nasty smells.
However, odour is only a reality which is experienced through the nose
and it does not last. Flavour is another rūpa included in the eight
inseparable rūpas. We are attached to food and we find its flavour very
important. As soon as we have tasted delicious flavour, attachment tends
to arise. We are forgetful of the reality of flavour which is only a
kind of rūpa. When we recognize what kind of flavour we taste, we think
about a concept, but this thinking is conditioned by the experience of
flavour through the tongue. Nutrition is another kind of rūpa which has
to arise with every kind of materiality. It can be exerienced only
through the mind-door. Nutritive essence is not only present in rice and
other foods, it is also present in what we call a rock or sand. It is
present in any kind of materiality. Insects are able to digest what
human beings cannot digest, such as, for example, wood. If one does not
develop understanding of realities one will be enslaved by all objects
experienced through the senses. On account of these objects akusala
cittas tend to arise. If someone thinks that there is a self who can own
what is seen, touched or smelt, he may be inclined to commit unwholesome
deeds such as stealing. In reality all these objects are insignificant,
they arise and then fall away immediately. In the ultimate sense life
exists only in one moment, the present moment. At the moment of seeing
the world of visible object is experienced, at the moment of hearing the
world of sound, and at the moment of touching the world of tangible
object. Life is actually one moment of experiencing an object.

