# The Four Great Elements

Rūpas, material phenomena, are not mere textbook terms, they are
realities that can be directly experienced. Rūpas do not know or
experience anything; they can be known by nā ma. Rūpa arises and falls
away, but it does not fall away as quickly as nāma. When a
characteristic of rū pa such as hardness impinges on the bodysense it
can be experienced through the bodysense by several cittas arising in
succession within a process. But even though rūpa lasts longer than
citta, it falls away again, it is impermanent. Rūpas do not arise
singly, they arise in units or groups. What we take for our body is
composed of many groups or units, consisting each of different kinds of
rūpa, and the rūpas in such a group arise together and fall away
together. There are four kinds of rūpa, the four “Great Elements”
(Mahā-bhūta rūpas), which have to arise together with each and every
group of rūpas, no matter whether these are rūpas of the body or rūpas
outside the body. The types of rūpa other than the four Great Elements
depend on these four rūpas and cannot arise without them. They are the
following rūpas:

-   the Element of Earth (paṭhavīdhātu) or solidity
-   the Element of Water (āpodhātu) or cohesion
-   the Element of Fire (tejodhātu) or heat
-   the Element of Wind (vāyodhātu) or motion

Earth, Water, Fire and Wind do not in this context have the same meaning
as in conventional language, neither do they represent conceptual ideas
as we find them in different philosophical systems. In the Abhidhamma
they represent ultimate realities, specific rūpas each with their own
characteristic. The element of earth, paṭhavī dhā tu, translated into
English as “solidity” or “ extension”, has the characteristic of
hardness or softness. It can be directly experienced when we touch
something hard or soft. We do not have to name this rū pa “element of
earth” in order to experience it. It is an element that arises and falls
away; it has no abiding substance, it is devoid of a “self”. We take
softness and hardness of the body for self, but these are only elements
arising because of conditions. It may seem that hardness can last for
some time, but in reality it falls away immediately. The hardness that
is experienced now is already different from the hardness that arose a
moment ago. The element of earth appears as hardness or softness; the
element of fire as heat or cold; the element of wind as motion or
pressure. These three elements can be experienced by touch. The element
of water cannot be experienced through touch, but only through the
mind-door. When we touch what we call water, cold which is the element
of fire, or hardness, which is the element of earth, can be directly
experienced. Every day we experience a great variety of sense objects,
but they are, in fact, only different compositions of rūpa elements.
When we touch a cushion or chair, tangible object may appear, such as
hardness or softness. We used to think that a cushion or chair could be
experienced through touch. When we are more precise, it is hardness or
softness that can be experienced through touch. Because of remembrance
of former experiences we can think of a cushion or chair and we know
that they are named “cushion” or “chair”. This example can remind us
that there is a difference between ultimate realities and concepts we
can think of but which are not real in the ultimate sense. Viewing the
body and the things around us as different combinations of rūpas may be
new to us. Gradually we shall realize that rūpas are not abstract
categories, but that they are realities appearing in daily life.

