# Death and Rebirth

What is birth, and what is it actually that is born? We speak about the
birth of a child, but in fact, there are only nāma and rūpa which are
born. The word “ birth” is a conventional term. We should consider what
birth really is. In order to understand what causes birth we should know
what conditions the nāma and rūpa which arise at the first moment of a
new lifespan. The citta which arises at that moment is called the
rebirth-consciousness or paṭisandhi-citta. Paṭisandhi means relinking,
it “ links” the previous life to the present life. It is usually
translated as rebirth-consciousness, but, since there is no person who
is reborn, birth-consciousness would be more correct. Since there isn’t
any citta which arises without conditions, the paṭisandhi-citta must
also have conditions. The paṭisandhi-citta is the first citta of a new
life and thus its cause can only be in the past. One may have doubts
about past lives, but how can people be so different if there were no
past lives? We can see that people are born with different tendencies
and talents. Cittas which arise and fall away succeed one another and
thus each citta conditions the next one. The last citta of the previous
life (dying-consciousness) is immediately succeeded by the first citta
of this life, without there being any interval. That is why tendencies
one had in the past can continue by way of accumulation from one citta
to the next one and from past lives to the present life. Since people
accumulated different tendencies in past lives, they are born with
different tendencies and inclinations. Rebirth-consciousness is the
result of kamma, it is vipākacitta. Our life starts at the moment the
paṭisandhi-citta arises together with the rūpa which is at the same time
produced by kamma. A lifespan ends when the last citta, the
dying-consciousness (cuti-citta) falls away. Kamma produces rūpa not
only at the first moment of life but throughout our life. Kamma produces
the vip ākacittas which experience pleasant and unpleasant objects
through the sense-doors, and it also produces throughout our life the
rūpas which can function as the sense-doors through which these objects
are received. Some kammas produce results in the same life in which they
have been performed, some produce result in the form of
rebirth-consciousness of a future life, or they produce result in the
course of a future life. We have performed deeds in past lives which
could produce rebirth but which have not yet come to fruition. We cannot
know which kamma will produce the next rebirth. If akusala kamma
produces the rebirth of the next life there will be an unhappy rebirth.
In that case the cittas which arise shortly before the
dying-consciousness are akusala cittas and they experience an unpleasant
object. The paṭisandhi-citta of the next life which succeeds the
cuti-citta (the dying-consciousness), experiences that same unpleasant
object. If kusala kamma produces the rebirth there will be a happy
rebirth. In that case kusala cittas arise shortly before the cuti-citta
and they experience a pleasant object. The paṭisandhi-citta of the next
life experiences that same pleasant object. The object experienced
shortly before the dying-consciousness may be a sign of kamma one
performed, or a sign of one’s future destiny, or it may be any object
experienced through one of the senses. The kamma that will produce the
next rebirth conditions the last javana-cittas arising before the
cuti-citta to experience that object.

There is no self who transmigrates from one life to the next life; there
are only nāma and rūpa arising and falling away. The present life is
different from the past life but there is continuity in so far as the
present life is conditioned by the past. The Visuddhimagga (XVI,
164-168) explains by way of similes that although the present is
different from the past there is continuity. The being who is born is
not the same as the being of the past life, but it is conditioned by the
past. There is “neither absolute identity nor absolute otherness”, as
the Visuddhimagga explains. We read with regard to the paṭisandhi-citta:

> “An echo, or its like, supplies The figures here; connectedness By
> continuity denies Identity and otherness. And here let the
> illustration of this consciousness be such things as an echo, a light,
> a seal impression, a looking glass image, for the fact of its not
> coming here from the previous becoming and for the fact that it arises
> owing to causes that are included in past becomings. For just as an
> echo, a light, a seal impression, and a shadow, have respectively
> sound, etc., as their cause and come into being without going
> elsewhere, so also this consciousness.”

