# The Paṭṭhāna, the seventh book of the Abhidhamma

The Seventh Book of the Abhidhamma is the “Paṭṭhāna” (translated partly
by the Venerable U Nā rada as “Conditional Relations”). The translator
also wrote a “Guide to Conditional Relations” with many explanations.
The “Paṭṭhāna” describes in detail all possible relations between
phenomena. There are twentyfour classes of conditions. Each reality in
our life can only occur because of a concurrence of different conditions
which operate in a very intricate way. These conditions are not
abstractions, they operate now, in our daily life. What we take for our
mind and our body are mere elements which arise because of their
appropriate conditions and are devoid of self. We should consider the
conditions for the bodily phenomena which arise and fall away all the
time. At the first moment of our life kamma produced the heart-base and
other rūpas together with the rebirth-consciousness, and throughout our
life kamma continues to produce the heartbase and the sense-bases. Not
only kamma, but also citta, heat and nutrition produce rūpas of the
body. The cittas which arise are dependent on many different conditions.
We tend to forget that seeing is only a conditioned reality and that
visible object is only a conditioned reality, and therefore we are
easily carried away by sense impressions. Each citta experiences an
object, be it a sense object or a mental object, and the object
conditions citta by object-condition, ārammaṇa-paccaya. It is beneficial
to remember that seeing, hearing and the other sense-cognitions are vipā
kacittas, cittas which are results of kamma. They arise at their
appropriate bases, vatthus, which are also produced by kamma. Hearing is
conditioned by sound which impinges on the earsense. Both sound and
earsense are rūpas which also arise because of their own conditions and
fall away. Thus, hearing, the reality which they condition, cannot last
either; it also has to fall away. Each conditioned reality can exist
just for an extremely short moment. When we understand this it will be
easier to see that there is no self who can exert control over
realities. How could we control what falls away immediately? When we
move our hands, when we walk, when we laugh or cry, when we are attached
or worried, there are conditions for such moments. Cittas succeed one
another without any interval. The citta that has just fallen away
conditions the succeeding citta and this is by way of
proximity-condition, anantara-paccaya. Seeing arises time and again and
after seeing has fallen away akusala cittas usually arise. In each
process of cittas there are, after the sense-cognitions have fallen
away, several moments of kusala cittas or akusala cittas, called
javana-cittas. These experience the object in a wholesome way or
unwholesome way. There are usually seven javana-cittas and each
preceding javana-citta conditions the following one by way of
repetition-condition, ā sevana-paccaya. We cling to visible object, or
we have wrong view about it, taking it for a being or a person that
really exists. Defilements arise because they have been accumulated and
they are carried on, from moment to moment, from life to life. They are
a natural decisive support-condition, pakatūpanissaya-paccaya, for
akusala citta arising at this moment. The study of conditions helps us
to have more understanding of the “Dependent Origination”, the
conditional arising of phenomena which keep beings in the cycle of birth
and death. Each link of the Dependent Origination conditions the
following one by way of several types of conditions. It is necessary to
know which conditioning factors are conascent with the dhamma they
condition and which are not. The “Paṭṭhāna” helps us to understand the
deep underlying motives for our behaviour and the conditions for our
defilements. It explains, for example, that kusala, wholesomeness, can
be the object of akusala citta, unwholesome citta. On account of
generosity which is wholesome, attachment, wrong view or conceit, which
are unwholesome realities, can arise. The “Paṭṭhāna” also explains that
akusala can be the object of kusala, for example, when akusala is
considered with insight. This is an essential point which is often
overlooked. If one thinks that akusala cannot be object of awareness and
right understanding, the eightfold Path cannot be developed.
