# Kamma and result

As we have seen, three cetasikas are unwholesome roots, akusala hetus:
attachment (lobha), aversion (dosa) and ignorance (moha). Three
cetasikas are beautiful roots, sobhana hetus: non-attachment,(alobha),
non-aversion, (adosa) and wisdom (paññā). Unwholesome roots, akusala
hetus, can motivate ill deeds through body, speech or mind. Ill deeds
are called in Pāli: akusala kamma. Kamma is the cetasika (mental factor
arising with the citta) which is intention or volition, in Pali: cetanā.
However, the word “kamma” is also used in a more general sense for the
deeds which are intended by cetanā. The term kamma-patha (literally
“course of action”) is used as well in this sense. There are akusala
kamma-pathas and kusala kamma-pathas, ill deeds and good deeds,
accomplished through body, speech and mind. As regards akusala
kamma-patha, there are ten akusala kamma-pathas and these are
conditioned by lobha, dosa and moha. They are: killing, stealing, sexual
misbehaviour, lying, slandering, rude speech, frivolous talk,
covetousness, ill-will and wrong view (diṭṭhi). Beautiful roots, sobhana
hetus, motivate good deeds such as generosity, abstention from ill
deeds, mental development which includes samatha and vipassanā. Whatever
conduct we follow in daily life is conditioned by the wholesome or
unwholesome roots accumulated from life to life. There is no self who
can determine to do wrong or to do what is right, it is conditioned by
the roots and many other factors. Each moment, whatever we do, is
conditioned. When we are generous, helping others or paying respect, we
may believe that there are only kusala cittas. However, what we take for
wholesome may be motivated by akusala, such as conceit or being intent
on some advantage for ourselves. Kusala cittas and akusala cittas
alternate in our life. This shows how deeply rooted defilements are.
Kamma is a mental activity which can be accumulated. Since cittas that
arise and fall away succeed one another in an unbroken series, the force
of kamma is carried on from one moment of citta to the next moment of
citta, from one life to the next life. In this way kamma is capable to
produce its result later on. A good deed, kusala kamma, can produce a
pleasant result, and an evil deed can produce an unpleasant result.
Kamma produces result at the first moment of life: it produces
rebirth-consciousness in a happy plane of existence such as the human
plane or a heavenly plane, or in an unhappy plane of existence such as a
hell plane or the animal world. Throughout our life kamma produces
seeing, hearing and the other sense-impressions that are vipākacittas,
cittas that are results. Vipā kacittas are neither kusala cittas nor
akusala cittas. Seeing a pleasant object is the result of kusala kamma
and seeing an unpleasant object is the result of akusala kamma. If there
is right understanding of the citta that is cause and the citta that is
result we shall know the meaning of anattā. We shall come to understand
that there is no self who can cause the arising of pleasant or
unpleasant experiences through the senses. Due to kamma gain and loss,
praise and blame alternate in our life.
