# Accumulated inclinations

The first citta in a life span is the rebirth-consciousness or paṭ
isandhi-citta. It is a vipā kacitta produced by kamma and it links the
past life to the present life. As we have seen, there are nineteen types
of vipākacitta that can perform the function of rebirth. The paṭ
isandhi-citta is succeeded by the bhavanga-citta (life-continuum). The
bhavanga-citta is the same type of citta as the paṭ isan-dhi-citta and
it experiences the same object. As we have seen, this object is the same
as the object experienced by the last javana-cittas of the previous life
and it is conditioned by the kamma that produces the
rebirth-consciousness of the following life. The bhavanga-citta keeps
the continuity in a lifespan. So long as one is still alive,
bhavanga-cittas arise and fall away during the time there is no
sense-door process or mind-door process of cittas. Bhavanga-cittas arise
in between the different processes of cittas which experience an object
through one of the six doors. It performs its function of keeping the
continuity in life until the dying-consciousness, the cuti-citta, arises
and one passes away from this life. The dying-consciousness of a life
that is ending experiences the same object as all the previous
bhavanga-cittas and it is of the same type. Thus, the
rebirth-consciousness, the bhavanga-citta and the dying-consciousness do
not experience objects that impinge on the six doors like the cittas
that arise in the different processes. The whole day cittas arising in
processes experience objects through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense
and mind-door and in between the processes there are bhavanga-cittas.
Each citta is succeeded by a following citta in the long series of
cittas in our life, there isn’t any moment without citta. In the course
of life kammas produce different vipā kacittas which experience objects
through the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue and the bodysense.
Vipākacittas neither like nor dislike the object, they do not react to
the object in an unwholesome or a wholesome way. However, shortly after
they have fallen away there are cittas which react to the objects
experienced through the senses either in an unwholesome way or in a
wholesome way. Akusala cittas or kusala cittas arising in a sense-door
process or mind-door process, are called javana-cittas (literally:
readiness, impulse, going). They arise usually in a sequence of seven
cittas of the same type. They fall away immediately but the inclination
to akusala and kusala is accumulated so that there are conditions for
the arising again of akusala citta and kusala citta. Since each citta is
succeeded by the next citta without any interval, the process of
accumulation can go on from moment to moment, from one life to a next
life. Each moment of kusala citta or akusala citta arising today is a
condition for the arising of kusala citta or akusala citta in the
future. There are different types of kusala citta and of akusala citta.
It is important to learn more about them in order to understand
ourselves, about the way we behave towards others in action and speech,
and the way we react towards pleasant and unpleasant events. It is citta
which motivates good deeds and evil deeds and these will produce their
results accordingly. The Buddha exhorted people to abstain from akusala,
to perform kusala, to purify the mind, and his impressive words were a
real support for people to follow his advice.

