# Feelings (part 2)

Domanassa, unhappy feeling, arises only with cittas of the jāti which is
akusala; it always arises with dosa-mūla-citta, citta rooted in
aversion, and it does not arise with lobha-mū la-citta, citta rooted in
attachment, nor with moha-mūla-citta, citta rooted in ignorance. When we
see someone else suffer, we have compassion and want to help him.
However, kusala cittas and akusala cittas arise closely one after the
other. We may be sad because of someone else’s suffering and then
akusala citta rooted in dosa, aversion, arises. This is accompanied by
unhappy feeling. At such a moment there is no compassion, but we may not
notice this.
Upekkhā, indifferent feeling, is different from somanassa and from
domanassa; it is neither happy nor unhappy. Upekkhā can arise with
cittas of all four jātis, but it does not arise with every citta.
Indifferent feeling can accompany lobha-mū la-citta.When we walk or when
we get hold of different things we use in our daily life, such as a pen
or a book, there is bound to be clinging even when we do not feel
particularly glad. We cling to life and we want to go on living and
receiving sense-impressions. Seeing, hearing, smelling and tasting which
are vip ākacittas experiencing a pleasant or unpleasant object, are
always accompanied by indifferent feeling. Often it is not known whether
the object experienced by these cittas was pleasant or unpleasant, they
fall away immediately. When a pleasant or unpleasant tangible object is
experienced through the bodysense, the body-consciousness, which is
vipākacitta, is not accompanied by indifferent feeling but by pleasant
bodily feeling or by painful bodily feeling. The impact of tangible
object on the bodysense is more intense than the impact of the other
sense objects on the corresponding senses. Pleasant bodily feeling and
painful bodily feeling are nāma. We can call them “bodily feeling”
because they are conditioned by impact on the bodysense. When, for
example, temperature which is just the right amount of heat or cold
impinges on the bodysense the body-consciousness which experiences it is
accompanied by pleasant bodiIy feeling. Body-consciousness is
vipākacitta and in this case kusala vipākacitta. When it experiences a
pleasant object, it is the result of kusala kamma, a wholesome deed, and
when it experiences an unpleasant object, it is the result of akusala
kamma, an unwholesome deed. We attach great importance to feeling, we
let ourselves be carried away by the feelings which arise on account of
pleasant or unpleasant objects we experience through the senses. The
Buddha classified feeling as a separate khandha because people cling
very much to feeling. We are enslaved to our feelings, but they are only
realities which arise because of the appropriate conditions and do not
last.

