# Rebirth in different planes of existence (1)

Akusala kamma and kusala kamma of different beings can produce nineteen
different types of rebirth-consciousness, paṭ isandhi-citta, in all,
arising in different planes of existence. The paṭ isandhi-citta is
vipākacitta, the result of kamma. One paṭisandhi-citta is akusala vipāka
and eighteen types are kusala vipāka. There are many degrees of each of
these nineteen types of paṭisandhi-citta because the kamma that produces
them can be of many degrees. Birth in a woeful plane is the result of a
bad deed and birth in a happy plane is the result of a good deed. Since
the deeds of beings are of many different degrees of kusala and akusala,
the results are of many different degrees as well. The paṭ isandhi-citta
that is akusala vipākacitta arises in an unhappy plane of existence and
the paṭisandhi-citta that is kusala vipākacitta arises in a happy plane
of existence. A plane of existence is the place where one is born. There
are different woeful planes and different happy planes of existence.
Only one type of paṭisandhi-citta is akusala vipāka, but it is of many
degrees. There are many varieties of akusala kamma and thus there must
be many varieties of an unhappy rebirth. The unhappy rebirth we can see
in this world is birth as an animal. Apart from the animal world there
are three more classes of woeful planes, which we cannot see; they are
the world of petas (ghosts), the world of asuras (demons), and the hell
planes. There are different kinds of hell planes because there are many
degrees of akusala kamma which produce different kinds of unhappy
rebirth. The akusala vipāka in hell is more intense than the sufferings
which can be experienced in the human plane. The descriptions of hells
in the Buddhist teachings are not merely allegories; the experience of
unpleasant things through eyes, ears, nose, tongue and bodysense is
akusala vipāka and akusala vipāka is reality. Life in a hell plane is
not permanent; when one’s lifespan in a hell plane is over there can be
rebirth in another plane. Birth as a human being is a happy rebirth. In
the human plane there is opportunity for the development of kusala. One
can study Dhamma and learn to develop the way leading to the end of
defilements, to the end of birth and death. Birth in the human plane is
kusala vipāka, but during one’s lifespan in this plane there are both
kusala vipāka and akusala vipāka. Each person experiences different
results in life: there are gain and loss, honour and dishonour, praise
and blame, happiness and misery. It is due to kamma whether someone is
born into pleasant or unpleasant surroundings, whether he belongs to a
family which is well-to-do or which is poor. The experience of pleasant
and unpleasant things through eyes, ears, nose, tongue and bodysense are
the results of kamma. Other happy planes, apart from the human plane,
are the heavenly planes. In the heavenly planes there is more kusala
vipāka than in the human plane and less akusala vipāka. There are
several heavenly planes and although life in a heavenly plane lasts a
very long time, it is not permanent. The woeful planes, the human plane
and the six heavenly planes which are deva planes, are sensuous planes
of existence. Sensuous planes of existence are planes where there is
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, the experience of tangible object
through the bodysense and other kāmāvacara cittas (cittas of the
sensuous plane of consciousness). There are eleven classes of sensuous
planes of existence in all. In the “Discourse on the Lesser Analysis of
Deeds” (Middle Length Sayings III, sutta 135) we read that Subha asks
the Buddha what the cause is of the different results human beings
experience from the time of their birth:

> “Now, good Gotama, what is the cause, what is the reason that lowness
> and excellence are to be seen among human beings while they are in
> human form? For, good Gotama, human beings of short lifespan are to be
> seen and those of long lifespan; those of many and those of few
> illnesses; those who are ugly, those who are beautiful; those who are
> of little account, those of great account; those who are poor, those
> who are wealthy; those who are of lowly families, those of high
> families; those who are weak in wisdom, those who are full of wisdom.”
> The Buddha answered Subha: ”Deeds are one’s own, brahman youth, beings
> are heirs to deeds, deeds are matrix, deeds are kin, deeds are
> arbiters. Deed divides beings, that is to say by lowness and
> excellence.”

