# Latent Tendencies

Defilements, akusala cetasikas, are of different levels, they may be
subtle or more coarse. Defilements that are transgressions (vītikkama
kilesa), are coarse defilements of the degree of unwholesome courses of
action through body or speech. Defilements one is possessed with and
that arise with akusala citta (pari- yuṭṭh āna kilesa) are medium
defilements that disturb the citta. Latent tendencies (anusaya kilesa)
are subtle defilements that lie dormant in the citta and do not arise
but condition the arising of akusala citta. The latent tendencies are
enumerated in the Tipiṭaka and the Commentaries, where it is stated that
the Buddha, the Fully Enlightened One, understood these by his perfect
knowledge of beings’ biases and underlying tendencies (āsayā nusaya
ñāṇa). Since each citta that arises and falls away is immediately
succeeded by the next citta, unwholesome and wholesome behaviour and
inclinations are accumulated from moment to moment and from life to
life. The latent tendencies which are unwholesome inclinations that are
accumulated are the following: sense-desire (kā ma-rāga), aversion
(paṭigha), conceit (māna), wrong view (diṭṭhi), doubt (vicikicchā),
desire for becoming (continued existence, bhavarā ga), and ignorance
(avijjā). It is essential to have more understanding of the latent
tendencies and their power. They are called subtle defilements because
they do not arise with the akusala citta, but they are powerful. Since
they have not been eradicated they can strongly condition and influence
our behaviour. They lie dormant in the citta like microbes infesting the
body. So long as they have not been eradicated we are like sick people,
because they can condition the arising of akusala citta when there are
the appropriate conditions. They can condition the arising of akusala
citta even to the degree of transgression of sīla at any time, and thus,
more defilements are accumulated again and added to the latent
tendencies. The teaching of the latent tendencies helps us to see why
the defilements in our life are so tenacious, arising again and again,
and why their arising is unforeseeable and uncontrollable. When we study
the enumeration of the latent tendencies, we should remember that these
latent tendencies are not abstract notions. The latent tendency of
sense-desire or sensuous clinging conditions akusala citta with
attachment to any kind of pleasant object. We may have expectations as
to kind words or praise from other people. This is selfish desire that
has been deeply accumulated and is very powerful. The latent tendency of
aversion conditions akusala citta with aversion, but we should know that
this has many shades. It is not only a matter of hate or anger, but it
also arises when we are upset or depressed because we do not receive the
pleasant object we were hoping for. The latent tendency of conceit
conditions the arising of akusala citta with clinging to the importance
of self. It can arise on account of any object experienced through the
six doorways, and it often motivates our speech and actions. All latent
tendencies condition the arising of akusala citta, but because of
accumulated ignorance we do not notice their arising, we are deluded
time and again. The latent tendencies are subsequently eradicated by the
lokuttara magga-citta of each of the four stages of enlightenment. Wrong
view and doubt are eradicated at the first stage, the stage of the
sotāpanna. At the second stage sense-desire and aversion are not yet
eradicated but they are diminished. They are completely eradicated at
the third stage, the stage of the anāgāmi. Conceit, desire for becoming
and ignorance are eradicated at the stage of the arahat. Thus we see
that the eradication of the latent tendencies takes a long time. It can
only be achieved by the development of understanding of all dhammas
appearing in daily life.

