# The Dhātu-Kathā, the Third Book

The third book of the Abhidhamma is the Discourse on Elements,
Dhātu-Kathā. This book deals with all realities, classified with
reference to the khandhas, the ā yatanas (translated as bases) and the
dhātus, elements. It deals with realities that are ‘included’(
sangahita), or not included (asangahita), and this pertains to the
different classifications of dhammas. It deals with dhammas that are
associated (sampayutta) or dissociated (vippayutta). Only nāma can be
associated with another nāma, such as citta and cetasikas. Rūpa does not
have such a close association with nāma. The charts added by the
translator makes the reading of these classifications easier. But we
should not forget that all these classifications pertain to the reality
appearing at this moment. The khandhas are citta, cetasika and rūpa
arising and falling away at this moment. When seeing arises, there is
the khandha of consciousness, viññāṇakkhandha, and there are the
accompanying cetasikas: the khandha of feeling, vedanākkhandha, saññā
khandha, saṅkhārakkhandha (including other cetasikas apart from feeling
and saññ ā), and there is eyesense which is rūpakkhandha. As to the
āyatanas, there are six internal āyatanas and six external ā yatanas.
The internal āyatanas are the five senses and mind-base, manā yatana,
which includes all cittas. The external ā yatanas are the five sense
objects and dammāyatana, which includes cetasikas, subtle rūpas and
nibbāna. When we see, hear or think we believe that a self experiences
different objects, but in reality there is the association of the
internal āyatana and the external āyatana, the objects “outside ”. As to
the elements, these can be classified in different ways, and in this
book they are classified as eighteen: the five senses, the five sense
objects, the “five pairs” of sense-cognitions experiencing the five
sense-objects (one of each pair being kusala vipākacitta and one akusala
vipākacitta), and in addition: mind-element (mano-dhātu), dhamma-dhātu
and mind-consciousness- element (mano-viññāṇa-dhātu). Mind-element and
mind-consciousness-element comprise cittas other than the
sense-cognitions. Dhamma-dhātu comprises cetasikas, the subtle rū pas
(sukhuma rūpas) and nibbāna. In all these classifications concepts such
as person or thing have not been included. Only paramattha dhammas have
been included. We may think of concepts, but these are not real in the
ultimate sense. Thinking itself is citta, it is a reality. If there is
no understanding of realities as just elements, we shall continue to
cling to the wrong view of self who sees, hears or thinks. Seeing is a
dhātu that experiences an object, it is nāma. Visible object is rūpa, it
is included in rūpakkhandha. Visible object or colour does not know
anything, it is dissociated (vippayutta) from nāma, it is completely
different from seeing.

Dhātus are not mere names, they have characteristics that can be
directly experienced when they appear. We are reminded by the Dhātukathā
that the teaching on elements pertains to realities appearing at this
moment which are anattā, devoid of a self.
