# The Vibhaṅga, the Second Book of the Abhidhamma

The second book of the Abhidhamma is the Vibhaṅga, the Book of Analysis,
and its commentary is the “Sammoha Vinodanī” , translated as the
“Dispeller of Delusion” (P.T.S.). The Vibhaṅga gives an explanation of
the khandhas (aggregates), āyatanas (sense bases), dhātus (elements),
and several other subjects. It gives explanations according to the
Suttanta method, by way of conventional terms, and the Abhidhamma
method, by way of ultimate realities. It also has sections of
interrogation. The aim is, as is the case of the whole of the
Abhidhamma, to develop right understanding of nāma and rūpa as they
appear in daily life. This book helps one to know more about the
deeper-lying motives of one ’s thoughts and actions. One may take them
for wholesome, but in fact there are very often selfish motives that are
unnoticed. The section on ‘the Small Items’ (Khuddakavatthu Vibhaṅga) is
most revealing in the descriptions of akusala such as conceit. It gives
an impressive list of all the objects on account of which conceit may
arise (832), namely: pride of birth, of clan, of health, of youth, of
life, of gain, of being honoured, of being respected, of prominence, of
having adherents, of wealth, of appearance, of erudition, of
intelligence, of being a knowledgeable authority.... Conceit is compared
to hoisting a banner; at the moment of conceit one finds oneself
important. There are many definitions of akusala, but the purpose is to
know them when they arise through the development of satipaṭṭhāna. We
read in the section of “the Heart of the Teaching” (1031): “The three
bad roots are to be known fully, are to be comprehended, are to be
abandoned...” Abandonment can only be accomplished by fully knowing them
and comprehending them. Among the many word explanations we read about
understanding (here translated as awareness, 525): “Therein what is
awareness? That which is wisdom, understanding, investigation, research,
truth investigation, discernment, discrimination, differentiation,
erudition, proficiency, subtlety, analysis, consideration, breadth,
sagacity, guidance, insight, awareness, goad, wisdom, controlling
faculty of wisdom, power of wisdom, sword of wisdom, tower of wisdom,
light of wisdom, lustre of wisdom, splendour of wisdom, jewel of wisdom,
absence of dullness, truth investigation, right view...” It is well
worth to consider these definitions. When we read about the subtlety of
wisdom we are reminded that the teachings are very subtle and have to be
carefully considered. Only thus there can be the lustre and splendour of
wisdom that causes the darkness of ignorance to disappear.

