# The Dhammasaṅganī, the first Book of the Abhidhamma

The Dhammasaṅganī, begins, after the Mā tika, with a description of
mahā-kusala citta accompanied by paññā. It enumerates all the sobhana
cetasikas assisting this citta while they accompany it just for a
moment. It refers to mahā-kusala citta experiencing an object, be it
visible object, sound, odour, flavour, tangible object or dhamma object.
This points to daily life. Time and again citta experiences an object
through one of the six doors. The Dhammasaṅganī states with regard to
the first type of mahā -kusala citta of the sense sphere: ”At a time
(yasmiṃ samaye) when mahā-kusala citta of the sense sphere accompanied
by joy and associated with understanding has arisen...” and then sums up
the accompanying cetasikas. The “Expositor” (p. 76) explains the word
samaya as time, occasion, concurrence of conditions, the mutual
contribution towards the production of a common result: “By this word
showing thus the condition, the conceit of one who believes that states
unconditionally follow one’s own will is subdued.” We cling to the idea
of our own will that can direct dhammas, but this is not according to
reality. Will or volition, be it wholesome, unwholesome or
indeterminate, is only a conditioned element. The mahā-kusala citta is
accompanied by the cetasikas that always accompany citta, the “
universals”, such as contact, feeling or remembrance, saññ ā, as well as
by the “particulars”, pakinnakas, cetasikas that accompany many cittas
but not all. Then follows a list of all the sobhana cetasikas necessary
for the arising of even one moment of kusala citta of the sense sphere.
For example, the cetasika confidence or faith, saddhā, always has to
accompany kusala citta. If there is no confidence in kusala, kusala
citta could not arise. There have to be non-attachment and non-aversion.
When we perform dāna or observe sīla we are not selfish, we are not
thinking of our own pleasure and comfort. There is calm with each kusala
citta, at such a moment there is no agitation. There has to be sati
which is non-forgetful of kusala. Sobhana cetasikas are necessary so
that mahā-kusala citta with paññā can arise just for one extremely brief
moment and perform its function, and then citta and cetasikas fall away
together. The cetasikas condition the citta by way of
conascence-condition and by several other conditions. Thus, we cannot
make kusala arise at will, it has no possessor; there is no one who can
direct its arising. It arises when the right conditions are present and
then it falls away immediately; nobody can cause it to last. All the
sobhana cetasikas that fall away are accumulated from moment to moment
so that there are conditions for the arising again of kusala citta. We
shall see that several cetasikas are listed more than once under
different aspects, such as understanding as faculty, or as power. The
list ends with: sampajañña (sati and pañña), samatha, vipassanā, pagg
āha (grasp, which is the faculty of energy), avikkhepa (balance,
self-collectedness, another word for ekaggata cetasika, one-pointedness
or concentration). Thus we see that these lists are not a mere summing
up, but that they point to the development of right understanding of
realities.

