# The Experience of Objects through different doorways

Seeing is an ahetuka vipā kacitta that experiences visible object
through the eye-door. Hearing is an ahetuka vipākacitta that experiences
sound through the ear-door. Each of the sense-cognitions experiences an
object through the appropriate doorway. There is not only one citta that
experiences visible object, or one citta that experiences sound, but
each of the sense-cognitions arises in a series or process of cittas
succeeding one another and sharing the same object. They all cognize the
same object, but they each perform their own function. Seeing is
preceded by the eye-door adverting-consciousness, which adverts to
visible object. It does not see but it merely turns towards the visible
object that has just impinged on the eyesense [(1)](#FOOT1)This citta is
an ahetuka kiriyacitta (inoperative citta), it is not akusala citta, not
kusala citta and not vipākacitta. Seeing, which is an ahetuka
vipākacitta, is succeeded by two more ahetuka vipākacittas which do not
see but still cognize visible object that has not fallen away yet. They
perform a function different from seeing while they cognize visible
object. Visible object is rūpa and it lasts longer than citta. These
cittas are receiving-consciousness (sampaṭicchana-citta), that receives
visible object and investigating-consciousness (santīraṇa-citta), that
investigates the object. The investigating-consciousness is succeeded by
the determining-consciousness (votthapana-citta), which is an ahetuka
kiriyacitta. This citta is followed by seven javana-cittas that are, in
the case of non-arahats kusala cittas or akusala cittas. There is a
fixed order in the cittas arising within a process and nobody can change
this order. There is no self who can determine whether the
determining-consciousness will be succeeded by akusala cittas or kusala
cittas. Cittas arise and fall away succeeding one another extremely
rapidly and nobody can make kusala citta arise at will. Kusala performed
in the past is a condition for the arising of kusala at present. When
the sense-door process of cittas is finished, the sense object
experienced by those cittas has also fallen away. Very shortly after the
sense-door process is finished, a mind-door process of cittas begins,
which experience the sense object which has just fallen away. Although
it has fallen away, it can be object of cittas arising in a mind-door
process. The first citta of the mind-door process is the mind-door
adverting-consciousness (mano-dvārā vajjana-citta) which adverts through
the mind-door to the object which has just fallen away. The mind-door
adverting-consciousness is neither akusala citta nor kusala citta; it is
an ahetuka kiriyacitta. After the mind-door adverting-consciousness has
adverted to the object it is succeeded by either kusala cittas or
akusala cittas (in the case of non-arahats), which experience that same
object. When visible object is experienced through the mind-door the
cittas only know visible object, they do not pay attention to shape and
form or think of a person or a thing. But time and again there are also
other mind-door processes of cittas which think of people or things and
then the object is a concept, not visible object. The experience of
visible object conditions the thinking of concepts of people and things
which arises later on. All the time sense objects impinge on the
different doorways. They appear just for a moment, and then they fall
away. The Buddha pointed out the dangers of being infatuated with the
objects we experience through the six doors. He taught people to develop
the wisdom which knows the realities experienced through the six doors
as nāma and rūpa, phenomena which are impermanent and non-self. What is
impermanent is “dukkha”, it cannot be happiness. When we come to know
things as they are, we will be less infatuated with objects.
