# The Sense Organs

For the experience of objects through the senses there have to be sense
organs and these are rūpas. Visible object and also the rūpa which is
eyesense are conditions for seeing. Eyesense does not know anything
since it is rū pa, but it is a necessary condition for seeing. Eyesense
is a rūpa in the eye, capable of receiving visible object, so that citta
can experience it. For hearing, the experience of sound, there has to be
earsense, a rūpa in the ear, capable of receiving sound. There must be
smellingsense for the experience of odour, tastingsense for the
experience of flavour and bodysense for the experience of tangible
object. Through the bodysense are experienced: the earth element,
appearing as hardness or softness; the fire element, appearing as heat
or cold; the wind element, appearing as motion or pressure. When these
characteristics appear they can be directly experienced wherever there
is bodysense. The bodysense is all over the body, also inside the body.
Thus, there are five kinds of sense organs. These sense organs can be
the doorways for the cittas that experience sense objects. As we have
seen, visible object, sound, odour, flavour and tangible object (which
consists of three of the four Great Elements) are experienced through
the corresponding sense-doors and they can also be experienced through
the mind-door. Rūpas of the body and also rūpas outside the body do not
arise without there being conditions for their arising. There are four
factors that produce rūpas of the body: kamma, citta, temperature (the
element of heat) and nutrition. As we have seen, kamma is actually the
volition that motivates good and evil deeds. Kamma that has been
committed has fallen away, but since it is a mental activity it is
accumulated and can produce result later on. Throughout our life kamma
produces seeing, hearing and the other sense-impressions that are
vipākacittas, cittas that are results. Rebirth-consciousness is the
mental result of kamma, vipākacitta, but at that moment kamma also
produces rūpas and kamma keeps on producing rūpas throughout life; when
it stops producing rūpas our life-span has to end. Kamma produces
particular kinds of rūpas such as the sense organs. Citta also produces
rūpas. Our different moods become evident by our facial expressions and
then it is clear that citta produces rū pas. Temperature, which is
actually the element of heat, also produces rūpas. Throughout life the
element of heat produces rūpas. Nutrition is another factor that
produces rūpas. When food has been taken by a living being it is
assimilated into the body and then nutrition can produce rūpas. Some of
the groups of rūpas of our body are produced by kamma, some by citta,
some by temperature and some by nutrition. The four factors which
produce the rūpas of our body support and consolidate each other and
keep this shortlived body going. If we see the intricate way in which
different factors condition the rūpas of our body we shall be less
inclined to think that the body belongs to a self. There are not only
rūpas of the body, there are also rūpas which are the material phenomena
outside the body. What we take for rocks, plants or houses are rūpas and
these originate from temperature. We may wonder whether there are no
other factors apart from the element of heat that contribute to the
growth of plants, such as soil, light and moisture. It is true that
these factors are the right conditions that have to be present so that a
plant can grow. But what we call soil, light and moisture are, when we
are more precise, different combinations of rūpas, none of which can
arise without the element of heat or temperature that produces them.
Rūpas outside the body are only produced by temperature, not by kamma,
citta or nutrition.
