# Citta and Cetasikas

Citta does not arise singly, it is always accompanied by cetasikas,
mental factors. Only one citta arises at a time and each citta is
accompanied by several cetasikas. Citta is the leader in cognizing an
object and the accompanying cetasikas have each their own function while
they assist citta in cognizing an object. Citta may be of one of the
four jātis of kusala, akusala, vipāka or kiriya. Cetasikas are of the
same jāti as the citta they accompany. Some cetasikas, such as feeling
and remembrance or “perception” (saññā), accompany each citta, others do
not. Feeling, in Pāli: vedanā, is a cetasika which arises with every
citta. Citta only knows or experiences its object; it does not feel.
Feeling, vedanā, however, has the function of feeling. Feeling is
sometimes pleasant, sometimes unpleasant. When we do not have a pleasant
or an unpleasant feeling, there is still feeling: at that moment the
feeling is neutral or indifferent. Perception or remembrance, in Pāli:
saññā, marks the object so that it can be recognized later on. Whenever
we remember something it is saññā, not self, which remembers. It is
saññā which, for example, remembers that this colour is red, that this
is a house, or that this is the sound of a bird. Contact, in Pāli:
phassa, is another cetasika which arises with every citta; it “contacts”
the object so that citta can experience it. There are also types of
cetasika which do not arise with every citta. Unwholesome mental
factors, akusala cetasikas, accompany only akusala cittas, whereas
sobhana cetasikas, “beautiful” mental factors, accompany kusala cittas.
Among the cetasikas which can accompany akusala cittas or kusala cittas,
some are roots, hetus. A root or hetu is the foundation of the akusala
citta or kusala citta, just as the roots are the foundation of a tree.
They give a firm support to the citta and cetasikas they arise together
with. There are three cetasikas which are unwholesome roots, akusala
hetus: attachment (lobha), aversion (dosa) and ignorance (moha). Akusala
cittas may be rooted in moha and lobha, or in moha and dosa, or they may
have moha as their only root. Moha arises with each akusala citta. Moha
is blindness, it does not know the danger of akusala; it is the root of
all evil. There are three sobhana hetus, beautiful roots: non-attachment
(alobha), non-aversion (adosa), and wisdom (paññā). All kusala cittas
are rooted in non-attachment and non-aversion, and they may or may not
be rooted in wisdom, paññā. There are many shades and degrees of the
akusala hetus and the sobhana hetus. Akusala citta is impure and it
leads to sorrow. At the moment of akusala citta there is no confidence
in wholesomeness; one does not see that akusala citta is impure and
harmful. For example, when we see a pleasant sight, akusala cittas with
attachment tend to arise. At such a moment there is “ unwise attention”
to the object which is experienced; we are enslaved to that object and
do not see the danger of akusala. Thus we go on accumulating more and
more akusala. We may find it difficult to see that even when we do not
harm or hurt others, the citta can still be akusala. For example, when
we like nature, there is a degree of attachment and attachment is not
kusala, it is different from unselfishness. We may see the danger of
akusala which is coarse, but it is difficult to see the danger of
akusala which is more subtle. However through the study of the Dhamma we
can acquire more understanding of akusala dhammas and then we may begin
to see the danger of all degrees of akusala. Whenever the citta is not
intent on wholesomeness, we act, speak or think with akusala citta. We
may not have unkind thoughts or thoughts of coarse desire, but the
cittas which think can still be akusala cittas; they are akusala cittas
whenever we do not think wholesome thoughts. We think time and again of
people, of things which have happened or will happen, and we should find
out for ourselves when thinking is kusala and when akusala. When the
citta is kusala, there is confidence in wholesomeness. Confidence, or
faith, saddhā, is a sobhana cetasika. Each kusala citta is assisted by
many sobhana cetasikas. When we see the value of kusala, there are
conditions for the arising of kusala citta. Kusala citta is pure and it
is capable of producing a pleasant result. Defilements and wholesome
qualities are cetasikas, they are non-self. They are not listed just to
be read and memorized, they are realities of daily life and they can be
known as they are by being mindful of them.

