# Dhamma in Detail

In all three parts of the Tipiṭaka we are taught about “dhamma”, about
everything which is real. Seeing is a dhamma, it is real. Colour is a
dhamma, it is real. Feeling is a dhamma, it is real. Our defilements are
dhammas, they are realities. When the Buddha attained enlightenment he
clearly knew all dhammas as they really are. He taught us the “ Dhamma”,
the teaching on realities, in order that we also may know dhammas as
they are. Without the Buddha’s teaching we would be ignorant of reality.
We are inclined to take for permanent what is impermanent, for pleasant
what is sorrowful and unsatisfactory (dukkha), and for “self” what is
non-self. The aim of all three parts of the Tipiṭaka is to teach people
the development of the way leading to the end of defilements. In the
Suttanta, the “Discourses”, the Dhamma is explained to different people
at different places on various occasions. The Buddha taught about all
realities appearing through the “six doors” of eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
bodysense and mind. He taught about cause and effect and about the
practice leading to the end of all sorrow. As regards the Abhidhamma,
this is an exposition of all realities in detail. The prefix “abhi” is
used in the sense of “preponderance” or “ distinction”. “Abhidhamma”
means “higher Dhamma” or “Dhamma in detail” . The form of this part of
the Tipiṭaka is different, but the aim is the same: the eradication of
wrong view and eventually of all defilements. Thus, when we study the
many enumerations of realities, we should not forget the real purpose of
our study. The intellectual understanding of realities (pariyatti)
should encourage us to the practice (paṭipatti) which is necessary for
the realization of the truth (paṭivedha). While we are studying the
different mental phenomena (nāmas) and physical phenomena (rūpas) and
while we are pondering over them, we can be reminded to be aware of the
nāma and rū pa which appear at that moment. In this way we will discover
more and more that the Abhidhamma explains everything which is real,
that is, the “worlds” appearing through the six doors of the senses and
the mind.

