# Ultimate Truth and Conventional Truth

Through the Buddhist teachings we learn that what we take for “self”,
for “our mind” and for “our body”, consists of changing phenomena. That
part of the Buddhist teachings which is the “ Abhidhamma” enumerates and
classifies all phenomena of our life: mental phenomena or nāma and
physical phenomena or rūpa. Seeing is nāma, it experiences visible
object through the eye-door. Visible object or colour is rūpa, it does
not experience anything. The eyesense, that functions as the eye-door
through which visible object is experienced, is also rūpa. The rūpas
that are sense objects, namely, visible object, sound, smell, flavour
and tangible object, and also the rūpas that are the sense organs of
eyes, ears, nose, tongue and bodysense, are conditions for the nāmas to
experience objects. Nāma and rūpa are interrelated. Nāma and rūpa are
ultimate realities. We should know the difference between ultimate
truth, paramattha sacca, and conventional truth, sammutti sacca.
Ultimate truth is not abstract. Ultimate realities, in Pāli: paramattha
dhammas, have each their own characteristic which cannot be changed. We
may change the name, but the characteristic remains the same. Seeing is
an ultimate reality, it experiences visible object which appears through
the eyes; it is real for everyone, it has its own unalterable
characteristic. Anger has its own characteristic, it is real for
everyone, no matter how we name it. Ultimate realities can be directly
experienced when they appear through eyes, ears, nose, tongue, bodysense
or mind. They arise because of their appropriate conditions.
Conventional truth is the world of concepts such as person, tree or
animal. Before we learnt about Buddhism, conventional truth, the world
of concepts, was the only truth we knew. It is useful to examine the
meaning of concept, in Pāli: paññatti. The word concept can stand for
the name or term that conveys an idea and it can also stand for the idea
itself conveyed by a term. Thus, the name “tree” is a concept, and also
the idea we form up of “tree” is a concept. We can think of concepts,
but they are not realities that can be directly experienced, without
having to name them.
