# Kathāvatthu, the Fifth Book

The Fifth book of the Abhidhamma is the Kathāvatthu (Translated as “
Points of Controversy”). Its commentary has been translated as “The
Debates Commentary”, P.T.S.) This book which is a treatise against
schismatic monks has been composed by Moggali-putta-tissa. It was
recited at the third Buddhist Council. The First Buddhist Council was
held by fivehundred arahats headed by the Venerable Mahā kassapa in Rā
jagaha shortly after the Buddha passed away. Here the Abhidhamma Pi ṭ
aka was also included along with the Vinaya and Suttanta. The Second
Buddhist Council was held by sevenhundred arahats headed by the
Venerable Mahāyasa one century after the Buddha’s passing away. The
version of the Texts in the First Buddhist Council was re-approved or
re-affirmed. The Third Buddhist Council was convened by King Asoka at
Pataḷiputta, about 240 B.C. Thousand Arahats were headed by
Moggaliputta-Tissa Thera who preached the Kathāvatthu treatise against
schismatic monks. At that time there were seventeen schismatic schools.
Thereupon, the Abhidhamma-Piṭaka reached its completeness and became
seven books. The Kathāvatthu consists of questions and answers, it is a
dialogue between the sakavādin (theravada) and the opponent. For
example, the first question is: ‘Is there, in the absolute sense, any
personality (puggala) to be found?’. In the teachings the term person is
used in figurative speech, in conventional sense, but in the ultimate
sense there is no person. Schismatic monks believed that a person really
existed. Similar questions about the person or the world are raised
today. We read, for instance, about questions on rebirth. The opponent
thinks: ‘the person transmigrates’. The Sakavādin asks whether it is the
identical person who transmigrates or a different person. Or, the
question is asked (Ch VIII, 75) whether there is an intermediate stage
between the end of a lifespan and the beginning of the next life at
rebirth. This book covers a wide range of subjects, and each question is
viewed from various angles. We read about speculative questions with
regard to the Dependent Origination, the four Truths, kamma and result,
emancipation, arahats, the future and the present, destinies,
impermanence, jhāna attainments, insight and many other subjects. Such
questions can remind us that so long as understanding of the dhamma
appearing at this moment is not being developed stage by stage, there
will always be doubt and ignorance of the truth.

